okay guys uh we're almost ready
to make this make this lecture
Immortal
okay are we on all right this is an
important lecture it's about
projection and and uh let me start by
just projecting a vector B down on a
vector a so just to so you see what the
geometry looks like in when I'm in in
just two Dimensions I'd like to find the
point along this
line so that that line through a is a
one-dimensional Subspace so I'm starting
with one dimension I'd like to find the
point on that line closest to B
can I just take that problem first and
then I'll explain why I want to do it
and why I want to project on other
subspaces so where where is the point
closest to B that's on that line it's
somewhere there and let me connect
that and and what's the whole point of
my picture now what what's the where
does orthogonality come into this
picture
the whole point is that this this best
point that's the projection
P of B onto the
line uh where is
orthogonality it's the fact that that's
a right angle that this the error this
is like how much I'm Wrong by this is
the difference between B and P the whole
point is that that that that's
perpendicular to a that's got to give us
the equation that's got to tell us
that's that's the one fact we know
that's got to tell us where that
projection is let me also say look I
I've drawn a triangle there so if we
were doing trigonometry we would do like
we would have angles Theta and distances
that would involve sin Theta and cos
Theta that leads to lousy formulas
compared to linear algebra the the the
formula that we want comes out nicely
and what's the what do we know we know
that P this projection is some multiple
of a right it's on that line so we know
it's it's in that one-dimensional
Subspace it's some multiple let me call
that multiple X of a so really it's that
number X I'd like to
find so th this is going to be simple in
1D so let's just carry it through and
then see how it goes in high dimension
okay the key fact is so the the key the
key to everything is that perpendicular
the fact that that a is perpendicular to
a is perpendicular to
e which is B minus a x x a I don't care
if that's x a that that equals
zero you see that as the central
equation that's saying that this
a is perpendicular to this correction
that's going to tell us what x is let me
just raise the board and simplify that
and out will come X
okay so if I simplify that uh let's see
I'll move one to to one term to one side
the other term will be on the other side
it looks to me like x * a transpose
a is equal to a transpose
B right I have a transpose B is one one
term a transpose a is the other so right
away here's my a transpose a but it it's
just a number now and I divide by it and
I get the answer X is a transpose B over
a transpose
A and P the projection I wanted is
that's the that's the right multiple
that's got a cosine Theta built in but
we don't need to look at Angles we've
just got vectors here and the projection
is p
is
a times that
X or x times that a but I I'm really
going to eventually I'm going to want
that X coming on the right hand side so
you see that I've
got two of the three formulas
already right here I've got the the the
equation that's the equation that that
that that leads me to the answer here's
here's the answer for x and here's the
projection okay can I do add just one
more thing to this onedimensional
problem one more like lift it up into
linear algebra into
matrices here's the last thing I want to
do with but don't forget those formulas
a transpose B over a transpose
a actually let's look at that for a
moment first uh um
suppose uh and and and a well then I
I'll let me I'll let me take this next
step so p is a * X so can I write that
then p is a * this neat number a
transpose B over a transpose
a that's our
projection can I ask a couple of
questions about it just while we look
get that digest that formula
suppose B is doubled suppose I change B
to
2B what happens to the
projection so suppose I instead of that
Vector B that I drew on the board make
it 2 B twice as long what's what's the
projection
now it's double to right it's going to
be twice as far if B goes twice as far
the projection will go twice as far and
you see it there if I put in an extra
Factor two then then P's got that factor
too now what about if I double
A what if I double the vector a that I'm
projecting
onto what what
changes no the projection doesn't change
at all right CU I'm just the line didn't
change if I double a or I take minus a
it's still that same line the projection
still in the same place and of course if
I double A I get a four up up above and
I get a four extra four below they
cancel out and the projection is the
same okay so
really this I want to look at
this
as the projection is there's a matrix
here the projection is being
is carried out by some Matrix that I'm
going to call the projection Matrix and
in other words the projection is some
Matrix that acts on this guy B and
produces the projection the
projection
p is the projection Matrix acting on
whatever the input is the input is B the
projection Matrix is p okay actually you
can tell me right away what this
projection Matrix is so this is a
pretty interesting
Matrix what Matrix is multiplying B I'm
just just from my formula I see what p
is p this projection
Matrix
is what is it I see a a transpose
above and I see a transpose a below
and those don't cancel that's not
one right that's a matrix because down
here the a transpose a that's just a
number a transpose a that's the length
of a squ and up above is a column time a
row column time a row is a matrix so
this is a full scale n byn Matrix if I
if I'm in N
Dimension and it's kind of an
interesting one and it's the one which
If I multiply by B then I get this you
see once again I'm putting parentheses
in different places I'm putting the
parentheses like
there I'm saying okay that's really the
Matrix that produces
this
projection okay now tell me
all right what are the properties of
that
Matrix I'm just using letters here A and
B I could put in numbers but I think
it's for once it's clearer with letters
because all formulas are simple a
transpose B over a transpose a that's
the number that multiplies the A and
then I see wait a minute there's a
matrix here and what's the rank of that
matrix by the
way what what's the rank of that Matrix
yeah let me let me just ask you about
that Matrix which looks a little strange
a a transpose over this number but
uh well I could ask you it's column
space yeah let me ask you it's column
space so what's the column space of a
matrix it's it's if you multiply that
matrix by anything you always get in the
column space right
the column space of a matrix
is when you multiply any vector by that
Matrix any Vector
B by The Matrix you always land in the
column space that's that's what column
spaces
were now what space do we always land in
what's the column space of what's the
result when I multiply this any Vector B
by my Matrix
so I have P *
B where am
I I'm on that line right the column
space so here are facts about this
Matrix the column space of
P of this projection Matrix is the line
through
a and the rank of this
Matrix is
you can all say it at
once one right the rank is one this is a
rank one Matrix actually it's exactly
the form that we we're familiar with
with rank one Matrix M with a rank one
Matrix a column times a row that's a
rank one Matrix that column is
the is the basis for the column
space just one dimension okay
so I know that much about the Matrix but
now there are two more facts about the
Matrix that that I want to that I want
to
notice is first of all is the Matrix
symmetric that's a natural question for
matrices and the answer is yes if I take
the transpose of this there's a number
down there the transpose of a a
transpose is a a transpose so p is
symmetric ppose equals P so this is a
key property that the projection Matrix
is
symmetric one more property now and this
is the real
one what happens if I do the projection
twice so I'm looking up looking for
something some information about
p² but just give me in terms of that
picture in terms of my picture
I take any Vector
B I multiply it by my projection Matrix
and that puts me there so this is
PB and now I project
again what happens now what happens when
I apply the projection Matrix a second
time to this so I'm applying it once
brings me here and the second time
brings me
I stay put right the projection for a
point on this line the projection is
right where it is the projection is the
same point so that means that if I
project
twice I get the same answer as I did in
the first projection so those are the
two properties that tell me I'm looking
at a projection Matrix
it's
symmetric and its square is itself
because if I project the second time
it's the same result as the first
projection okay so that's uh and and
then here's the exact formula when I
know what I'm projecting onto that line
to a then I know what p is so do you see
that I have all the pieces here for
projection on a line
now and those please remember those so
there are three formulas to remember the
formula for x the formula for p which is
just ax and then the formula for capital
P which is the
Matrix good good okay now I want to move
to more
Dimensions so we're going to have three
formulas again but you'll have
to they they'll be a little different
because we won't have a single line but
uh a plane or threedimensional or a n
dimensional
Subs okay so so now I'm move to the next
question maybe I maybe I'll say first
let me say first why I want this
projection and then we'll figure out
what it is we'll go completely in
parallel there and then we'll use it
okay why do I want this projection well
so why why
project it's
because I'm as as I mentioned last time
this new chapter deals with
equations axal
B may
have no
solution so that that's that's really my
problem that I'm I'm given a a bunch of
equations probably too many
equations more equations than
unknowns and I can't solve
them okay so what do I do I solve the
closest problem that I can solve and
what's the closest one well ax will
always be in the column space of a
that's my problem my problem is ax has
to be in the column space and B is
probably not in the
col so I change
B to
what I choose the closest Vector in the
column
space so I'll
solve ax = P
instead that that one I can do where p
is this is the
projection of B
onto the column
space that's why I want to be able to do
this because I I have to find a solution
here and I'm going to put a little hat
there to indicate that it's not the X
it's not the x that doesn't
exist it's the X hat that's best
possible so if so I must be able to
figure out what's the good projection
there what's the good right hand side
that is in the column space that's as
close as possible to be and then I'm
then I know what to do okay so now I've
got that problem so so that's that's why
I have the problem again but now let me
say I'm in three
dimensions so I have a
plane maybe for example
and I have a vector B that's not in the
plane and I want to Project
B down into the
plan
okay so there's my question how do I
project a vector and I'm I'm really what
I'm looking for is a nice
formula and I'm counting on linear
algebra to just come out right a nice
formula
for the projection of of B into the
plane the nearest point so this again a
right angle is going to be
crucial okay now so what's first of all
I've got to say what is that plane to
get a formula I have to tell you what
the plane is how am I going to tell you
a plane I'll tell you a a basis for the
plane I'll tell you two vectors
A1 and A2 that that give you a basis for
the flame so let let say say there's an
A1 and here's a a vector
A2 they don't have to be
perpendicular but they better be
independent because then that tells me
the plane the plane is the it's the
plane
of A1 and A2
and actually going back to my to this to
this connection this plane is a column
space it's the it's the column
space
of what
Matrix what what Matrix so how do I
connect the two
questions I'm trying I'm I'm thinking
how how do I project onto a
plane and I want to get a matrix in
here everything's cleaner if I write it
in terms of a matrix so what
Matrix has these has that column space
well of course it's just the Matrix that
has A1 in the First Column and A2 in the
second
column right just just let's be sure
we've got the the question before we get
to
answer so I'm looking
for again I'm given a matrix a with two
columns and really I'm ready once I get
to two I'm ready for n so it could be
two columns it could be n columns I'll
write the answer in terms of the Matrix
a and the point will be those two
columns describe the plane they describe
the column space and I want to
project okay and I'm given a vector B
that's probably not in the column space
of course if B is in the column space my
projection is simple it's just
B but most likely I have an error E this
B minus P
part which is probably not zero okay but
the beauty is that I know
the from
geometry or I could get it from calculus
or I could get it from linear algebra
that that this this Vector this this is
the part of B that's that's
perpendicular to the
plane that that e is perpendicular is
plane you're you're intuition is saying
that that's the crucial fact that that
that's that that's going to give us the
answer okay so let me that's the problem
now for the
answer so so this is a lecture that's
really like moving
along because uh I'm just popping that
problem up there and asking you what
combination now yeah so what is P what
is this projection P this is projection
p is some multiple
of
these bases guys right some multiple of
the
columns but I don't like writing out X1
A1 Plus X2 A2 I would rather write that
as a
x well actually I should put if I'm
really doing everything right I should
put a little hat on it to remember that
that that this x that those are the
numbers and I could have put a hat way
back
there is right so this is this is the
projection p p is
axar and I'm looking for
xar so that's what I want an
equation so so so now I've got hold of
the problem the problem is find the
right combination of the columns so
that the error Vector is perpendicular
to the
plane now let me turn that into an
equation so what so I'll raise the board
and just turn that turn what we've just
done into an
equation so let me I'll I'll write again
the main point the projection is a XB X
hat and our problem is find X
hat and the key
is
that B minus ax
hat that's the error this is the E is
perpendicular
to the
plane that's got to give
me well what am I looking for I'm
looking for two equations now because
I've got an X1 and an
X2 and I'll get two equations because so
this thing e is perpendicular to the
plane so what does that mean I guess it
means it's perpendic I to A1 and also to
A2 right those are two vectors in the
plane and the things that are
perpendicular to the plane are
perpendicular to A1 and A2 let me just
repeat this this guy then is
perpendicular to the plane so it's
perpendicular to that vector and that
Vector not it's not it's perpendicular
to that of course but it's so it's
perpendicular to everything in the plane
and the plane is really told me by A1
and A2 so really I have the equations A1
transpose b -
ax is zero and also A2
transpose B minus
ax is
zero those are my two
equ but
I want those in Matrix
form I want to put those two equations
together as a matrix equation and it's
just comes out right look at the Matrix
a
transpose put A1 A1 transposes its first
row A2 transposes its second row that
multiplies this B minus
ax and gives me the zero and the zero
um you see that I'm just this is one way
to to to come up with this equation so
the equation I'm coming up with is a
transpose b - a
x is
zero
okay that's my equation
all right now I I want to stop for a
moment before I solve it and just think
about it first of all do you see that
that
equation back in the very first problem
I solv on a line what was what was
uh on a line the The Matrix a only had
one column it was just little
a so in the first problem I solved
projecting on a line this for for
Capital a you just change that to little
a and you have the same equation that we
solved
before a transpose eals
Z okay now a second thing second
comment I would like to since I know
about these four
subspaces I would like to get them into
this picture
so let me ask the
question what Subspace is this thing
in which of the four subspaces is that
error Vector e this is this is nothing
but e this is this Sky coming down the
in in down perpendicular to the plane
what Subspace is e
in from this equation
well the equation is saying a transpose
e is zero so I'm learning here that e is
in the null space of a
transpose right that's my equation and
now I just want to see hey of course
that that was right
because things that are in the null
space of a
transpose what do we know about the null
transpose so the last lecture gave us
the sort of the geometry of these
subspaces and the orthogonality of them
and do you remember what it was what on
the on the on the right side of our big
figure we always have the null space of
a transpose and
the column space of a and their
orthogon so e in the null space of a
transpose is saying e is perpendicular
to the column space of
a
yes like I I just feel okay the damn
thing came out right uh the equation for
the the equation that I struggled to
find for e
really
[Music]
said what I wanted that the the the
error E is perpendicular to the coln
space of a just right and from our four
fundamental subspaces we knew that that
is the same as that to say e is in the
null space of a transpose says e is
perpendicular to the column space okay
so we got this equation now let's just
solve it all right let me just rewrite
it as a transpose a
x equal a transpose B that's our
equation that gives us
X and oh I allow me to keep remembering
the one-dimensional case the
one-dimensional
case this was little a so this was just
a number little a little a transpose a
transpose a was just a vector row times
a column a number and this was a number
and X was the ratio of those numbers but
now we've got
matrices this this one is n byn a
transpose a is an N byn Matrix okay so
can I move to
the next board for the
solution okay there this is the the the
key
equation now I'm ready for the formulas
that we have to remember what's X
hat what's the
projection what's the projection Matrix
those are my three questions that we
answered in the 1D case and now we're
ready for in the N dimensional case so
what is X hat well what can I say
but a transpose a inverse
a transpose
B okay that's the solution to to our
equation what's the projection that's
more interesting what's the
projection the projection
is a xat that's how X hat got into the
picture in the first place X hat was
the was the combination of column and I
had to look for those numbers and now I
found them was the combination of The
Columns of a that gave me the projection
okay so now I know what this guy is so
it's just I multiply by a a a transpose
a inverse a transpose
B that's looking a little messy but it's
uh not
bad that that combination is is our like
magic combination this is the thing
which is which Ed which was which is
like uh what's it like what was it in
one
dimension what was that we had this we
must have had this thing way back at the
beginning of the
lecture what did we oh then a was just a
column so it was little a little a
transpose over a transpose a right
that's what it was in
1D you see what's happened in more
Dimensions I I'm not allowed to just
divide because because I don't have a
number I have to put inverse because I
have an N byn
Matrix but same formula
and now tell me what's the projection
Matrix what
Matrix is multiplying B to give the
projection right there just there it I
even I even already underlined it by
action the projection
Matrix which I use capital P is this
it's it's that thing so I write it again
a *
a transpose a inverse *
aose
now if you bear with me I'll think
about what I what I what have I done
here I've got this
formula now the first thing that occurs
to me is
is something bad look um why don't I
just you know here's a product of two
matrices and I want its
inverse why don't I just use the formula
I know for the inverse of a product and
say okay that's a inverse time a
transpose
inverse what will happen if I do
that what will happen if I if I say hey
this is a inverse * a transpose inverse
then shall I do
it it's going to go on videotape if I do
it and I don't all right I'll put it
there but just like don't take the
videotape quite so carefully okay so if
I if I put that thing it would be a a
inverse a transpose inverse a
transpose and what's that
that's the
identity but what's going
on so right you see my question is
somehow I did I did something wrong that
wasn't allowed and and and why is
that because a is not a square Matrix a
is not a square Matrix it doesn't have
an inverse
so so I have to leave it that way this
is not okay if if a was a square
invertible Matrix then then I couldn't
complain yeah I I'll think let me think
about that case but but my main case the
whole reason I'm doing all this is that
a is this Matrix that
has X too many rows it's just got a
couple of columns like A1 and A2
but lots of rows not square and if it's
not Square this a transpose a is square
but I can't pull it apart like this so I
I I'm not allowed to to do this pull
apart except if a was Square now if a is
square what's what's going on if a is a
square Matrix a nice Square in
invertible
matx what's up with that what's what's
with that case so this is
all the formula ought to work then too
if a is a nice Square invertible Matrix
what's its column space so it's a nice n
byn invertible everything great Matrix
what's its column
space the whole of
RN so what's the projection Matrix if
I'm projecting under the whole
Space it's the identity right if I'm
projecting
B on the whole Space not just onto a
plane but onto all of 3D then B is
already in the column space the
projection is the identity and this is
gives me the correct formula p is R but
if I'm projecting on a Subspace then I
can't split those apart and I have to
stay with that formula
okay
and what can I say so so I remember this
formula for 1D and that's what it looks
like in nend
dimension and what are the properties
that I expected for any projection
Matrix and I still expect for this one
that Matrix should be symmetric and it
is p transposes
p because if I transpose this this guy
symmetric
and it's inverse of symmetric and if I
transpose this one when I transpose it
will pop up there become a the a
transpose will pop up here and I'm back
to P
again and do we dare try the other
property which is
p² =
p it it's got to be right
cuz we know geometrically that the first
projection pops us onto the column space
and the second one leaves us where we
are so I expect that if I multiply by
and let me do it if I multiply by
another P so there's another a another a
transpose
a inverse
a
transpose can you
God eight A's in a row is like OB scene
but uh uh do you see that it
works so I'm squaring that so what do I
do how do I see that multiplication
well yeah I just want to put parentheses
in good places so I see what's happening
yeah here's an a transpose a sitting
together so when that a transpose a
multiplies its inverse all that stuff go
right and leaves just the a transpose at
the end which is just what we
want so P ^2 equals P so sure enough
those two properties hold okay that's
that okay we really have got now all the
formulas X hat the projection p and the
projection Matrix Capital C and now my
job is to use
okay so when would
I when would I uh have a bunch of
equations too many equations and yet I
want the best answer and the the
most important example the most common
example is if I have
points here's the here's the
application these squares
fitting by a
lot okay so I I'll start this
application today and there's more in it
than uh I can do in this same lecture so
that'll give me a chance to recap the
formulas and there they are and and
recap the idea so let me let me start
the problem uh
today I'm
given a bunch of data
points and they lie close to a line but
not on a line let me take this say at
tal to 1 2 and
3 I have
one and two and two again so my data
points are are this is the like the time
Direction and this is like well let me
call that b or Y or something I'm given
these three
points and I want
to fit them by a line by the best
straight line so the problem is fit the
points uh
one one is the first point the second
point is T =
2 b = 1 and the third point is T = 3 Bal
2 so those are my three point tal sorry
that's
two
yeah okay so this is the0 1 one this is
the 22 and that's the 32 and of course
there isn't a line that goes through
so I'm looking for the best line I'm
looking for a line that probably goes
somewhere you think it goes somewhere
like
that I'm look I didn't mean to make it
go through that point it won't it'll
kind of it'll it'll go between so the
error there and the error there and the
error there
are as small as I can get
them okay what I'd like to do is
find the Matrix a because once I found
the Matrix a the formulas take
over so what I I'm looking for this line
B is C +
DT so this is in the homework that I
sent out for today find the best line so
I'm looking for these numbers C and
D that tell me the
line and I want them to be as close to
going through those three points as I
can get I can't get exactly so there are
three equations to go through the three
points it would it will go exactly
through that
point if let's see that first point has
tal to 1 so that would say C + d = 1
this is the 1
one the second Point T is
2 so C + 2D should come out to equal
two but I also want to get the third
equation in and that that third equation
T is 3 so C +
3D equal only
2 that that's the key is to write down
what equations we would like to solve
but can't reason we if we could solve
them that would mean that we could put a
line through all three points
and of course if these numbers one 2 two
were different we could do
it but with those numbers 1 two two we
can't so what is our equation
axal axal B that we can't
solve I I I want I just want to say
what's the Matrix here what's the
unknown X and what's the right hand side
so this is the Matrix is
111 1 2
3 the unknown is c and
d and the right hand side is 1
two2 right I've just taken my equations
and I've said what is ax and what is b
then there's no solution this is the
typical case where I have three
equations two unknowns no solution but
I'm still looking for the best
solution and the best solution
is taken is is to solve not this
equation axal B which has which has no
solution but the equation that does have
a solution solution which
was this one so that's the equation to
solve that's the central equation of the
subject I can't solve axal B but
magically when I multiply both sides by
a
transpose I get an equation that I can
solve and its solution gives me X the
best X the best projection and I
discover what's the Matrix that's behind
it
okay so next time I'll complete an
example numerical example today was all
letter numbers next time thank